# Version Control with Git

> **Note:** Ensure that you have completed the [Developer Environment Setup](3.%20Developer%20Environment%20Setup.md) section before proceeding with this section of the guide.

We use **Git** for version control to track changes, collaborate, and manage the development lifecycle. This guide provides an overview of the Git workflow, best practices, and our branching strategy.

## Git Workflow Overview

### 1. **Cloning the Repository**

Follow the steps outlined in the [Developer Environment Setup](3.%20Developer%20Environment%20Setup.md) guide to clone the project repository to your local machine.

### 2. Check out the `dev` Branch

Before starting work on a new feature or bug fix, ensure you are on the `dev` branch. This is the main development branch where all new features and bug fixes are integrated.

```bash
git checkout dev
```

### 3. Make sure your local `dev` branch is up-to-date

Before creating a new branch, make sure your local `dev` branch is up-to-date with the remote repository:

```bash
git pull
```

### 4. Create a New Branch

All feature development, bug fixes, or other work should be done in separate branches. Use a meaningful branch name that clearly indicates the purpose of the branch (e.g., `feature/user-authentication`, `bugfix/login-error`).

```bash
git checkout -b feature/branch-name
```

The `dev` branch is the main development branch where all new features and bug fixes are integrated. Make sure to create your branch from the `dev` branch.

> **Note:** When creating a new branch, githooks will automatically set up the branch to track the remote branch, create a new database branch in our remote database service called Neon, and run the necessary migrations and seeds for the new database branch.

### 5. Work on Your Branch

Make changes, add new features, or fix bugs on your branch. Ensure that your code adheres to the [Code Style & Best Practices](5.%20Code%20Style%20&%20Best%20Practices.md) and that it is well-documented.

### 6. Commit Your Changes

**Commit often** and provide **clear, concise commit messages** that explain why a change was made rather than just what was done. This helps other developers understand the context behind the change.

Use the following format for your commit messages:

```bash
git add .
git commit -m "Short, descriptive message"
```

**Good examples:**

- feat(auth): implement user login functionality
- fix(api): correct response type for user profile request

**Bad examples:**

- fixed bug
- updated code

### 7. Push Your Changes

Once you have committed your changes, push your branch to the remote repository:

```bash
git push
```

### 8. Create a Pull Request (PR)

When you are ready to merge your changes into the `dev` branch, create a pull request. Provide a detailed description of the changes, including any relevant context, screenshots, video demos, or links to related issues.

Before submitting your PR, ensure:

- The app builds locally and has not type errors.
- Your code follows the [Code Style & Best Practices](5.%20Code%20Style%20&%20Best%20Practices.md).
- There are no linting or formatting issues.

When a PR is created, GitHub Actions will run several checks, including linting, formatting, and type checking, tests, building, and deploying the preview environment. If any checks fail, address the issues and push the changes to the branch.

Before requesting a review, ensure:

- The changes have been verified in the preview environment.
- All checks have passed.

### 9. Review and Merge

Two reviews are needed in order to merge a PR: one from another developer, and another from the Designer.

The developer will review the code for quality, correctness, and adherence to best practices. The designer will review the design implementation and ensure it meets the requirements.

Once the PR is created and all CI/CD checks pass, tag another developer for review. The reviewer will provide feedback, ask questions, and suggest improvements. Address any comments or suggestions and make the necessary changes.

After the code has been reviewed and approved, you can merge the feature branch into `dev`.

> We use the **`Squash and Merge`** option to keep the commit history clean and concise.

Once merged:

- the feature will be automatically deployed to the development environment.
- the database branch in Neon will be automatically deleted.
- all migrations and seeds will be run on the development database, ensuring that the database is in sync with the codebase.

## Branching Strategy

Our Git branching strategy is based on the **Gitflow Workflow**, which defines a strict branching model designed around project releases. The main branches in our repository are:

1. **`main`**: Represents the production-ready codebase. This branch should always contain the latest stable release of the application. Changes are merged into `main` only after thorough testing, QA, and approval.
    - The production application lives at app.cleavr.com.

1. **`dev`**: Represents the development branch where all new features and bug fixes are integrated. This branch is considered the mainline of development.
    - The development application lives at dev.cleavr.com.

1. **`staging`**: Represents the staging environment where we test new features before they are deployed to production. This branch is used for final testing and quality assurance. Changes are merged into `staging` after they have been tested in the development environment and have passed all tests and QA.
    - The staging application lives at stg.cleavr.com.

1. **`feature-branches`**: Created from the `dev` branch for developing new features or fixing bugs. Once the work is complete, a pull request is opened to merge the changes back into `dev`. Changes are merged into `dev` though pull requests after all CI/CD checks have passed, the developer has verified in the deployed preview environment for their feature branch environment that the changes work as expected and nothing else has been broken, and the code has been reviewed and approved.

### Feature Branches

- **Naming**: Feature branches should be named in a way that describes the feature being developed. Example:

  - feature/user-authentication
  - feature/add-payment-gateway

### Bugfix Branches

- **Naming**: Bugfix branches should be named in a way that describes the bug being fixed. Example:

  - bugfix/login-error
  - bugfix/404-page-not-found

---

## Conflict Resolution

Sometimes, conflicts will arise when multiple branches modify the same file. If you encounter conflicts during a merge or rebase, resolve them as follows:

1. Open the file(s) with conflicts.
1. Manually edit the file to keep the correct changes.
1. Mark the conflict as resolved:

    ```bash
    git add <file>
    ```

1. Continue the merge or rebase process:

    ```bash
    git rebase --continue
    ```

After resolving conflicts, ensure that the project builds and all tests pass before completing the merge.

---
## Pull Request (PR) Review Process

We follow a strict code review process to maintain code quality and catch potential issues early.

- **Ensure tests and checks pass**: Before merging, all tests must pass and there should be no unresolved comments from the code review.
- **Assign a reviewer**: Once you’ve submitted a pull request, assign at least one team member to review your code.
- **Be open to feedback**: Code reviews are an opportunity to improve. Be open to feedback and suggestions from your peers.
- **Address comments promptly**: If the reviewer requests changes, address them promptly and push the changes to the branch.
- **Branch must be up to date**: PR branches must be up to date with `dev`. branch in order to merge. The branch will be not up to date if another PR merges after you check out your branch from `dev`. In this case, due to our PR merging strategy (`Squash and Merge`), it is recommended that we use a `merge` to sync the feature branch with `dev` instead of a `rebase`. Rebasing will result in an conflicting commit history with `dev` and an inaccurate diff, making your PR very difficult to review.

---

By following these Git best practices, we ensure that our codebase remains clean, organized, and easy to collaborate on. If you’re ever unsure of something related to Git usage or our workflow, feel free to reach out for assistance.

---

[⬅️ Back to Main Page](../New%20Developer%20Orientation%20and%20Resources.md)
